# What's new in TON DEV?

## Key Updates and Features

- Build a custom blockchain environment with TON Labs VM and Solidity compiler open-sourced. Сheck the repositories for:
- TON Labs implementation of [Virtual Machine](https://github.com/tonlabs/ton-labs-vm) written in Rust. Use it to ensure additional security for your projects.
-  [Solidity compiler](https://github.com/tonlabs/TON-Solidity-Compiler) and [linker utility](https://github.com/tonlabs/TVM-linker) code.
- More [contract samples](https://github.com/tonlabs/samples).  Also, make sure to visit our [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC9kJ6DKaxSxk6T3lEGdq-Gg) for new tutorials.
- Check low-level SDK features available in [open source core](https://github.com/tonlabs/TON-SDK).
- Use [https://testnet.ton.dev](https://testnet.ton.dev/graphql) cloud to test your projects in a production-like environment. Just switch server (node address) in your project to start.
- Modify a previously deployed contract with tvm_setcode in Solidity contracts. Check the [docs](https://docs.ton.dev/86757ecb2/p/504e0b), to see how to implement it and then use the feature in the SDK.
- Optimize gas costs with tvm_accept function in Solidity contracts, check docs for more details.
- Implement complex application logic with an option to deploy a contract from contract. Here is the doc to help you learn the ropes.
- Complex GraphQL queries made easily with a new query schema: no more unions, reduced number of nested levels in structures. See updated samples in the doc.
- Get information on each block with ShardDesc list implementation.
- Filter large numbers exceeding unsigned int 32 bit by `0x` prefix. 
- Correct address representation with a workchain ID. Check the new local node Giver address using this address format. Note that old Givers are not available anymore.
- Use extended Initial State parameters to redeploy your contracts to new addresses with minimal changes, if needed. Now the Initial State it can contain both keys and data passed into Deploy message. So, the future contract address is determined both by keys and data. For more details check tests in ton-client-js repository and the doc on JS API functions for messages to contracts.

## SDK Detailed Changelog

### Local Node

- Support for GraphQL scheme v2;
- New Giver supporting the `address` ABI type provided (check the SDK docs for updates);
- Memory leaks fixed.

### Client Libraries

- All addresses passed to a library and returned from it are represented in new address string format containing the workchain ID. The only exception `getDeployData` that returns Account ID, because the image created can be deployed to any workchain.
- `convertAddress` function for representing address in different formats (see official documentation for format descriptions [here](https://test.ton.org/HOWTO.txt)).
- Support for TON mnemonics in JS Client. Parameters added to all mnemonic related functions with the following fields:
- `dictionary` – TON: 0, ENGLISH: 1, CHINESE_SIMPLIFIED: 2, CHINESE_TRADITIONAL: 3, FRENCH: 4, ITALIAN: 5, JAPANESE: 6, KOREAN: 7, SPANISH: 8 (defaults to TON)
- `wordCount` – 12, 15, 18, 21, 24 (defaults to 24)
- `TONCryptoModule.mnemonicDeriveSignKeys` to simplify generation of the sign keys in single step
- `TONCryptoModule.publicKeyToString` – convert public key to TON compatible string representation
- More detailed errors descriptions for Contracts Module implemented in JS and Rust clients.
- `getCodeFromImage, getDeployData, createRunBody` functions are implemented to the library support `SETCODE` and `deploy` of one contract by another contract. See our ton-client-js tests for details.
- Now Initial State of the contract right after Deploy may contain keys and data that can be passed into Deploy message. This means that the future address of the contract now depends not only on keys but on data as well. See our ton-client-js tests for details.
- `waitFor` method in queries module has new optional argument `timeout` to restrict waiting time in ms.
- `run` method now makes retries every 10 seconds if no transaction with the `finalized` status was received.

### TONDEV CLI

JavaScript client code generation:

- NEW: `abi` contract instance field;
- NEW: `runLocal` contract instance method;
- FIX: default level is deploy now (`-L deploy`);
- FIX: contract class has no `deploy` method and `imageBase64` field for *run level*.
- NEW: ABI functions are added to a generated class as methods.
- NEW: Solidity compiler runs mounted to folder where the Solidity file is stored allowing to compile Solidity sources with imports. Distinct compiler containers created for each host directory with compiled .sol files.
- NEW: JavaScript generated code supports deploy `initParams`.
- NEW: JavaScript generated code docs now use JS types with doc hints for corresponding Solidity types: `@param {string} foo (uint256)`.
- NEW: `--js-module` option have added to JavaScript generator to control exporting method for generated class.
- NEW: `tondev clean -c` option to clean containers only
- NEW: gen command to generate contract code for a specific language
- NEW: keys command for key pair generation
- Compilation logic changed as `tondev setup` does not create compiler container, it is created by `tondev sol`.

## Update Guide

1. If GraphQL queries in your project contain addresses, update them according to the new address structure.
2. As compilers now support the `address` ABI type, newly compiled contracts use that type instead of `uint256` used before. So, there is not need to add `0x` prefix to an address to pass it as contract function parameter, just pass the address as is. **Note**: If you want to call old contract with an `uint256` address, retrieve the relevant Account ID from address by calling `convertAddress` and pass the result with `0x` prefix as contract function parameter.
3. Make sure to review all your queries and update them according to the new GraphQL scheme.
4. If you do not use the` tvm_accept` method, use `runLocal ` to call all functions that do not change the contract state.

## Component Versions

- ton-client-node-js:0.17.0
- ton-client-js:0.17.0
- ton-client-web-js:0.17.0
- ton-client-react-native-js:0.17.0


 